Back around 1840 or so, it was common knowledge
that all stars had planets around them. And then
the Chamberlain-Morton Theories came along, and
then we were a cosmic freak. The solar system was
the only solar system in the observable universe.
came along and rehabilitated the nebular
hypothesis. got to be in the space age, you know,
the idea that solar systems are common. And, of
course,
the literature is littered with claims of
detecting planets around other stars that don't
hang up. What's your opinion? Are solar systems,
in the sense of ours, not just as they're a rock
floating around some of the stars, common or
uncommon?
Yeah, you're right. Every time somebody
discovers a planet around a
neighboring star, they don't usually pan out.
Well, in the sense that there are almost certainly
other planets around
other stars, I don't think there's a question to
that. Life is more than any other planet. This is
another question. Is that the question you're
asking? Here's going to be the next one. Again, if
you go back to 1840 or 1870,
every planet's inhabited. Then you get to the
early part of this century with H.G. Wells, who was
very negative about it. We were a cosmic freak.
Well, now lately people have been searching for
extraterrestrial intelligence by radio means
and so forth. But lately it seems to me that it's
getting back to the cosmic freak again. What's
your opinion? No, I quite agree. I think that's the
trend that we're moving toward. You're right,
about 10 years ago, planets were ubiquitous
around most stars, and a certain percentage of
those, well, you could work it out with Drake's
equation there. It made all kinds of sense. If you
put in the numbers, there was a certain percentage
of those planets that were inhabited. Well, where
are they? They're not making a concerted effort to
get in touch with us, so now you have to start asking
yourself, well, maybe they're not there. Yeah, I
think that's right. I think there is a realization
that if we're not alone, we don't have too many
neighbors. And again, we better make sure that we
don't screw up the one civilization that we have to
deal with at the moment. So yeah, I think that's
another emerging view is that we're not nearly as
plentiful as we once thought. There's been some
attention lately given to the fact that some
asteroids are apparently dead comets, but of
course the first two asteroids that were
photographed turned out to be solid, hard rocks.
How common do you think it is for a comet to turn into
an asteroid, or do you think in general they just
sort of evaporate? Well, I think they do both,
actually. I think some comets, once they lost
their volatile contents, certainly turned into
asteroids, at least temporarily. I think this
comet, Shoemaker-Levy 9, that's about to collide
with Jupiter next July is probably, my guess would
be a degassed comet, a very fragile structure that
was torn apart by the tidal forces of Jupiter in
July of 92. The line between comets and asteroids
is no longer clearly drawn. It's very fuzzy. Comet
Wilson-Harrington was seen in 1949. It was
rediscovered in 1979, VA, an asteroid. So it was
once active. It is no longer. So there's one
example of a dead comet, if you will. Perhaps it's
only dormant. These things could crust over. And
then at some later time, they might blow off a
portion of the crust and become active again when
the interior ices are exposed. I think a fair
fraction of the near-Earth asteroids were once
comets. Dynamically, it's much easier to explain
the population if you have some comets coming in
that way. The estimates of the number of
perihelion passes that a comet can make before
something happens to it have varied all over the
lot. What do you think the situation is now?
Recently, fairly recently, the last couple of
years, there's been a realization that comets can
have periods where they're dormant. They're
active. They're dormant. They crust over, turn
into or lose their bottles entirely. So the
estimates that we were seeing five or ten years ago
whereby comets only last 500 or 1,000 returns to
the sun, I think those estimates have to be revised
up dramatically. Comets like Encke have
obviously been in its current orbit for millennia
because The Tauric meteor showers have been
observed for millennia, although the comet
itself wasn't observed until the late 1700s.
Barring differences due to the fact that some
comets have longer periods than others and so see
the sun more frequently or less frequently, do you
think the structure of the nucleus of all comets is
basically similar?
Certainly they're chemically similar. For the
spectroscopic work that's been done on periodic
comets and long period comets, there are many
differences between them, but there's no, you
can't put the long period comets in one box and the
short period comets in another and say these are
chemically distinct from one another. They just
aren't. There's some short period comets that are
peculiar and some long period comets that are also
peculiar. But within some broad range, they're
pretty much chemically the same animals, which
suggests that they were all formed at the same time
and probably at the same place.
Non-gravitational effects on cometary orbits is
one of your specialties. And part of that includes
rotation of comet nuclei. Have you folks come up
with anything? I mean, there's a random thing. I
mean, any correlation with period or anything.
Well, you can observe some active comments and
note the jet structures coming out from the
nucleus. And from the shape of those jet
structures, you can infer a rotation, certainly.
But you can't do the traditional photometric
light curve analysis that you can on asteroids to
get a rotation period. The only thing you can
really say with regard to comets, there are very
few comets that have a reasonable rotation period
determined. I think there's only a half dozen or
so. They all seem to be a little longer than...
Asteroids of a comfortable
size, I'm not sure what that means. Perhaps
they've been defunded by these same outgassing
forces, I don't know. But again, there's only a
half dozen or so comets for which a reasonable
rotation period has been determined. And even
those have large errors. So it's still, I think,
too early to say much about that. Going back into
the 19th century when the standard way of
observing comets was to look through the
telescope and eye magnification and draw the
nucleus, with hindsight now you can look at some of
the great comets of the last century and you can see
the jets coming out from the hot spots and you can
see the comet rotating as the jet swings around
like a water hose. Didn't people put two and two
together back then, do you think? Well, Bessel
actually did put two and two together, but he was
the exception. He, back in, well, back in 1835,
he actually proposed that there was some
outgassing activity that was preferentially
toward the sun. and
he made the example that if this outgassing
occurred preferentially toward the Sun and
preferentially before perihelion as opposed to
after perihelion, you would get a uh decreased in
the commons period
and likewise if the outgassing took place after
perihelion preferentially you would get an
increase in the commons period he didn't
attribute this to outgassing in the sense that
this is ice that was vaporizing but he came very
close to whipple's uh 1950 model, even so. And his
idea for the non-gravs was actually more accurate
than Fred's mechanism was for the
non-gravitational effects. But, again, it's a
connection, I think, with the meteor showers and
comets. The meteors were obviously due to
particles hitting the Earth's atmosphere And so
the inference was that comets were a collection of
particles, a flying sandbank. And I think that was
the notion that was so ingrained and so obvious to
most astronomers that these jets that you refer
to, they made up ad hoc suggestions as to how to
explain those. There's another one on a similar
line. Well, Newton's laws of motion have been
known for a long time, and action equals reaction
have been known for a long time, and rockets have
been around for a millennium. And yet, as you
mentioned earlier, the explanation of the
non-gravitational effects, in particular on
Encke, the first example, as due to a resisting
medium, a mysterious medium of some sort, hung
around for a long time. When did that—when and who
first thought that this could be—that the rocket
effect, if you will, could be the explanation?
Well,
Encke, of course, as you noted, postulated that
there was some sort of an ether surrounding the—in
the inner solar system, and Encke, in its the
prograde orbit around the sun was being slowed by
this resisting medium. It's unfortunate that the
non-gravitational effects on Encke were in the
sense that they were, in the sense that the period
of Encke is decreasing. Now, if they were
increasing, and they are for many comments, he
never would have been able to propose that.
particular mechanism, but it was just bad luck, I
guess. And this ether had been around for
centuries, of course. It started with the Greeks,
gravitation. So it was something that he brought
back to explain these non-gravitational
effects. And the notion lingered for several
decades thereafter. But again, the first one who
pointed out a contrary view that these might be
reactive forces acting on the comet's nucleus
with vessels. But his views did not carry the day
because
Encke's hypothesis, he could predict quite
accurately the returns of his comet using his
erroneous theory. His model of the
interplanetary ether And the drag effects on his
comet did indeed explain the decreasing period of
his comet and allowed him to make very accurate
predictions of when the comet would next appear at
perihelion. And so the fact that he was
successfully predicting the comet's increasing
period added considerable weight to what turned
out to be an erroneous hypothesis. One last
question and then I'll let you go. The sun graces
all apparently belong to the same family and have a
common parent. Must have been an enormous body.
And of course, we haven't seen them all. How can you
score? I mean, we're getting, if you add them all
up, and goodness knows how many there are. Now
we're starting to get a fairly large body.
Certainly no Jupiter. But how could that be? Well,
comets' parent bodies can be as large as, well,
some might say Pluto is a very large comet. Chiron
may be a very large comet.
There's no real upper limit on the size of these
things. The progenitor for the sun-grating comet
is thought to be the comet of 1106, perhaps 240 BC as
well. No, I'm sorry, that's Halley. There's
another one back there, though, I forgot in the
year that the Greeks actually noted the split. But
I think the comet of 1106 is thought by Brian to be
the progenitor of many of the sun creatures, not
all of them. But that mechanism whereby a large
parent comet breaking up into many smaller comets
may well explain the preponderance of short
period comets that we see now. There are too many,
far too many of them. There are too many
short-period comets for current theories to deal
with. So that splitting of major comets in the
past, either spontaneous splitting or splitting
because of tidal stresses like Shoemaker-Levy 9,
may indeed not provide the answer for why there are
so many short-period comets.